Publish 1st of June: Rethinking the frontend (#349)
solita/solita.github.com: _posts/2020-06-01-rethinking-the-frontend.md

end
group Interaction after page has been loaded
 note left of frontend: user clicks\nnext page
 frontend -> backend: GET /items?start=20&limit=20
 backend -> db: SQL query
 db -> backend: result rows
 backend -> frontend: query results as JSON
 note left of frontend: frontedn renders\nupdated information
end
@enduml
-->
![typical SPA sequence](/img/2020-rethinking-frontend/spa-sequence.png)

The above image shows a simplified startup sequence for a hypothetical SPA frontend that shows some
data queried from a database. There's quite a lot that needs to be done before the frontend is
ready to render the data the user actually wants to see. The subsequent interaction after the initial
page had been loaded is much less work.

## A new (old) approach

The SPA approach is good for many applications, but it does add a lot of complexity. In the halcyon
days of the early 2000s the go to way for web development was fully server side rendered, like [JSP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JavaServer_Pages) or [PHP](https://www.php.net/).
There was no API, the server simply rendered full pages and used whatever database resources it needed

> to fill in dynamic parts. JavaScript was mostly used for simple enhancements like form validation before

Reviewer: "fill in _the_ dynamic parts"

sending.

> There's nothing wrong with making a fully server rendered application today, but many applications

Reviewer: "server rendered" -> "server-rendered"

> have needs and user expectations that require more fine grained updates than reloading the page with

Reviewer: "fine grained" -> "fine-grained"

each user interaction or refreshing the page to check for new updates.

> We can combine the server side rendering with [WebSockets](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WebSocket)

Reviewer: "server side" -> "server-side"

to provide granular updates to the browser and receive callbacks. We can have our cake and eat it too!

## Ripley to the rescue

[Ripley](https://github.com/tatut/ripley) is a new [Clojure](https://clojure.org/) library that

> implements a fully server side rendered programming model that can serve full pages but also

Reviewer: "server-side-rendered"

takes care of updating things that change without page reloads. You can create rich webapps
without the need for a SPA frontend.

Creating user interfaces with ripley should feel similar to browser side frontend
development: you create functions that take in data and render HTML output.

```clojure
;; create a shared state counter (shared by all users)
(def counter (atom 0))

;; function that takes in counter atom and renders the UI
(defn counter-app [counter]
  (h/html
    [:div
      "Counter value: " [::h/live {:source counter
                                   :component #(h/out! (str %))}]
      [:button {:on-click #(swap! counter inc)} "increment"]
      [:button {:on-click #(swap! counter dec)} "decrement"]]))
```

The above example looks similar to [Reagent](https://github.com/reagent-project/reagent)
(a ClojureScript React wrapper), but it is all rendered on the server.
The button callbacks defined with `:on-click` are actually run on the server.

> The special `[::h/live ...]` element register a source on the server for this

Reviewer: "register" -> "registers"

> page. Whenever the atom changes, the component rerendered on the server and the

Reviewer: "the component _is_ re-rendered", but using the active voice might make it clearer to know who's doing what: "…changes, Ripley re-renders the component and sends the resulting HTML to the client…"

resulting HTML sent via WebSocket to the client.

Ripley includes a tiny JS client library that does the WebSocket handling: sending
event handler callbacks to the server and patching in new fragments received from
the server.

Ripley tries to be as efficient as possible and the HTML output is optimized at compile
time by prerendering all static parts to HTML that can be directly written to the result
stream.

<!---
@startuml
group Initial page render
  frontend -> backend: request index page
  backend -> db: SQL query data
  db -> backend: result rows
  backend -> frontend: full index page
  note left: browser renders the page\ncontaining the data\nuser wants to see
end
group Interaction after page has been loaded
 note left of frontend: user clicks\nnext page
 frontend -> backend: WS 1:[]
 backend -> db: SQL query
 db -> backend: result rows
 backend -> frontend: WS 0:R:...new HTML content...
 note left of frontend: frontend patches in\nupdated content
end
@enduml
-->
![ripley sequence](/img/2020-rethinking-frontend/ripley-sequence.png)

> The above image shows the same hypothetical application with ripley. The client

Reviewer: "ripley" -> "Ripley"

requests the page and directly receives HTML having all the content in place.
The subsequent interaction is interesting as well. When user clicks the "next page"
button, only the callback id and possible arguments are sent to the server via the
WebSocket. The server will run the query and send only the changed part of the
page back over the WebSocket.

The basic model is that a live component is rerendered on the server and its full

> HTML is sent back but ripley can also delete elements, append or prepend content

Reviewer: "ripley" -> "Ripley"

or change attributes. The update granularity can be decided per component when
implementing live components.

The model has many implications and some trade-offs we will explore next.

### Time to interactive

SPA frontend apps are often large applications that the client needs to download before
it can render the page for the user to see and interact with. This problem has some work
arounds like module splitting and server side rendering with hydration. These solutions
bring extra complexity that your application and build process needs to deal with.

> With ripley we just send the HTML of the page ready to go. The usual markup for a page in

Reviewer: "ripley"

the application is likely tiny compared to the frontend JS code and API payloads.

### No need for an API

> With SPA frontend you still need to backend to service the data needs.

Reviewer: "With _an_ SPA"

"need _a_ backend" maybe?

Most applications will need to fetch things from a database and store new things to the database.
This essentially turns the backend into a database API. That's fine if you need it for other clients
as well, but it shouldn't be necessary just to service your frontend.

The API will also need to encode information to some format (often JSON) and your frontend
will need to parse the information. With server side rendering this extra round trip can be
completely avoided.

### No need for client side state management

With the backend being a database API comes another important source of complexity:
client side state management. You need a way to store the information on the client
and make sure that long lived pages aren't stale. Programming a two way synchronization
of frontend app state and the backend database is interesting work to be sure, but the
complexity is incidental and has nothing to do with the particulars of your application.
If you can skip it, that's more code that doesn't need to be written and debugged.

### Leveraging browser strengths

> SPA frontend apps often require special handling to mimic browser's native navigation

Reviewer: "mimic _a_ browser's"

with [pushState](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/History/pushState).

> Refreshing in a SPA frontend means losing all the accumulated state and having to

Reviewer: "_an_ SPA"

refetch everything. That's mitigated with frontend routing libraries, but those too
are another source of incidental complexity.

The browser is very capable of caching your static assets so a server side rendered

> app doesn't need to care about working around

Reviewer: working around what?

### Build complexity

> The traditional server side rendering can be done with a single server project.

Reviewer: "~The~ Traditional"

A separate frontend and backend requires two builds each with their own dependencies
and build steps. Now many would say separation of concerns and differing skill sets
needed for frontend and backend work makes this split beneficial. That split then
requires synchronization between the projects or some flexible API like GraphQL.

> In my exprience full stack development is very common and the same people are

Reviewer: "experience"

doing everything from frontend to backend so the separation argument isn't very
convincing to me in many cases.

### Server resources

> With server side rendering and WebSocket enhancement, the browser is effectively treated

Reviewer: Perhaps "With WebSocket-enhanced server-side rendering, the…"

Or maybe even: "With WebSocket-enhanced server-side rendering, Ripley effectively treats the browser as a…"

as a dumb display client. The app logic for the dynamic parts have to exist somewhere.
This requires server resources for each user that has the page open. This may or may not
be a problem depending on the case. A single server can easily handle thousands of
connections.

> The requirement for constant network connections makes this approach unsuitable for use in

Reviewer: I think it's great that you also discuss the tradeoffs here. 👍

serverless cloud platforms.

### Interaction latency

Some applications require very rich interactions and those will benefit most from executing

> logic directly on the browser. But given the average [human reaction time](https://humanbenchmark.com/tests/reactiontime)

Reviewer: "given that"

is over 200 milliseconds there's plenty of time for a server round trip in most cases.
Perhaps a rich text editor component will need browser side components still but common CRUD
applications with tabular listings and forms are no problem.

## Closing remarks

> While ripley is still a very young library, the techologies used are nothing novel.

Reviewer: "ripley"

Server side rendering has been with us since the beginning of the web and WebSocket
support in browsers has been around for nearly a decade.

> Ripley isn't unique in providing this sort of programming model. It was heavily inspired

Reviewer: It's great that you mention prior art in this space. 👍

takes care of updating things that change without page reloads. You can create rich webapps
without the need for an SPA frontend.

Creating user interfaces with Ripley should feel similar to browser side frontend
development: you create functions that take in data and render HTML output.

```clojure
;; create a shared state counter (shared by all users)
(def counter (atom 0))

;; function that takes in counter atom and renders the UI
(defn counter-app [counter]
  (h/html
    [:div
      "Counter value: " [::h/live {:source counter
                                   :component #(h/out! (str %))}]
      [:button {:on-click #(swap! counter inc)} "increment"]
      [:button {:on-click #(swap! counter dec)} "decrement"]]))
```

The above example looks similar to [Reagent](https://github.com/reagent-project/reagent)
(a ClojureScript React wrapper), but it is all rendered on the server.
The button callbacks defined with `:on-click` are actually run on the server.
The special `[::h/live ...]` element registers a source on the server for this
page. Whenever the atom changes, Ripley re-renders the component on the server and sends

> the resulting HTML sent via WebSocket to the client.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the resulting HTML via WebSocket to the client.
```

 frontend -> backend: WS 1:[]
 backend -> db: SQL query
 db -> backend: result rows
 backend -> frontend: WS 0:R:...new HTML content...
 note left of frontend: frontend patches in\nupdated content
end
@enduml
-->
![ripley sequence](/img/2020-rethinking-frontend/ripley-sequence.png)

The image above shows the same hypothetical application with Ripley. The client
requests the page and directly receives HTML having all the content in place.
The subsequent interaction is interesting as well. When user clicks the "next page"
button, only the callback id and possible arguments are sent to the server via the
WebSocket. The server will run the query and send only the changed part of the
page back over the WebSocket.

The basic model is that a live component is rerendered on the server and its full
HTML is sent back but Ripley can also delete elements, append or prepend content
or change attributes. The update granularity can be decided per component when
implementing live components.

The model has many implications and some trade-offs we will explore next.

### Time to interactive

SPA frontend apps are often large applications that the client needs to download before

> it can render the page for the user to see and interact with. This problem has some work
> arounds like module splitting and server side rendering with hydration. These solutions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it can render the page for the user to see and interact with. This problem has some workarounds like module splitting and server side rendering with hydration. These solutions
```
